.\" Copyright (c) 2021 Michio Honda
.\" All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
.\" modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions
.\" are met:
.\" 1. Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer.
.\" 2. Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
.\"    notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the
.\"    documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
.\"
.\" THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND
.\" ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
.\" IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
.\" ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
.\" FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
.\" DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS
.\" OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION)
.\" HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT
.\" LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY
.\" OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF
.\" SUCH DAMAGE.
.\"
.\" This document is derived in part from the enet man page (enet.4)
.\" distributed with 4.3BSD Unix.
.\"
.\" $FreeBSD$
.\"
.Dd April 2, 2021
.Dt PASTE 4
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm paste
.Nd a fast TCP/IP networking using the netmap API
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Cd device netmap
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a feature of the
.Xr netmap 4
that allows the applications to use the host TCP/IP stack over the netmap API.
The resulting system call and I/O batching, across multiple connections, and
zero copy enable high throughput and connection scalability.
.Nm paste
also supports zero copy data transfer to or from persistent memory (PM) with the
.Nm extmem
feature.
.Ss NAMING
.Nm
ports are named
.Pa pstSSS:PPP
where
.Pa pst
indicates the
.Nm
port type and
.Pa SSS
indicates a data path.
.Pa PPP
names a port. The same prefix, separated by the colon,
is used to associate a NIC port with the same data path.
.Ss SEMANTICS
Unlike regular port types, a
.Nm
port transmits and receives application-level data.
Every slot thus contains a file descriptor and data offset at which
the transport protocol header terminates; this offset is additional to
the generic offset obtained by NETMAP_ROFFSET().
On RX the kernel sets these slot attributes whereas the application does so for
TX slots.  A TX or RX ring may contain slots whose buffers belong to different file
descriptors.

On RX, the applications see an in-order TCP stream across the multiple
slots indicated by the same file descriptor; the kernel never sets the buffers
of out-of-order segments in an RX ring of the
.Nm
port.

To read or write the file descriptor and data offset in a slot, use the utility
functions described later.

A typical application would use 66 byte data offset for ethernet and IPv4
headers, and TCP
header with the 12 byte timestamp option that is usually attached to every TCP
segment.
If the headroom does not match the length of the actual protocol
headers, the kernel shifts the application data in the buffer at the expense of
data copy overhead.

.Nm
port is gone after the process lifetime and the associated NIC port is also
released, unless one or more registered sockets are alive.
.\"
.Ss CONTROL
.Nm
introduces two
.Xr ioctl 2
subcommands to
.Xr netmap 4
ports, indicated in the
.Pa nr_reqtype
field of
.Pa struct nmreq_header .
.
.Bl -tag -width XXX
.It Dv NETMAP_REQ_PST_ATTACH
attaches a NIC to the port.
.Pa nr_body
points to
.Pa struct nmreq_vale_attach :
.Bd -literal
struct nmreq_vale_attach {
	struct nmreq_register reg;
	uint32_t port_index;
	uint32_t pad1;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa nr_mem_id
in
.Pa reg
must be identical to that of
.Nm
port, which can be found in the
.Pa struct nmport_d
structure filled by
.Pa nmport_open_desc() .
.
.It Dv NETMAP_REQ_PST_FD_REG
associates a file descriptor to a
.Nm
port.
.Pa nr_body
points to
.Pa struct nmreq_pst_fd_reg :
.Bd -literal
struct nmreq_pst_fd_reg {
	int32_t fd;
	int32_t pad;
};
.Ed
.Pp
.Pa fd
is an accepted TCP socket.
.Xr listen 2
socket should not be registered.
Although currently only TCP is supported, UDP support will be coming soon.

.El
.\"
See
.Xr netmap 4
for the general
.Pa struct nmreq_header
format.
.\"
.Ss UTILITY FUNCTIONS
Four macros are available to read or set the file descriptor or data offset in the slot.
.\"
.Bl -ohang
.It Ft int Fn nm_pst_getfd slot
Get the file descriptor embedded in
.Fa slot .
.It Ft void Fn nm_pst_setfd slot fd
Set the file descriptor
.Fa fd
to the
.Fa slot .
.It Ft int Fn nm_pst_getdoff slot
Get the additional offset embedded in
.Fa slot .
.It Ft void Fn nm_pst_setdoff slot doff
Set the additional offset
.Fa doff
in
.Fa slot .
.El
.\"
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Ss TEST PROGRAM
.Pa phttpd
is an HTTP server that supports
.Nm .
General HTTP benchmark tools, such as
.Nm wrk ,
can be used as the client.
.\"
.Ss BASIC USAGE
Typical TCP server code look like following.
.Pp
.Bd -literal -compact

   ...
#include <net/netmap_paste.h>
   ...

const u_int DOFF = 66; /* Ether/TCP/IP + timestamp */

void write_txring(char *p, int len, int fd, struct netmap_ring *ring)
{
    u_int cur = ring->cur;
    struct netmap_slot *txslot = &ring->slot[cur];

    buf = NETMAP_BUF_OFFSET(ring, slot->buf_idx);
    memcpy(buf + DOFF, p, len);

    slot->len = len + DOFF;
    nm_pst_setdoff(slot, DOFF);
    nm_pst_setfd(slot, fd);
    ring->head = ring->cur = nm_ring_next(cur);
}

void tcp_server(void)
{
    char *name = "pst:0";
    char *nic_name = "pst:em0";
    struct nmport_d *nmd;
    struct nmreq_header hdr;
    struct nmreq_vale_attach reg; // reuse
    struct pollfd fds[2];

    /* open and listen socket */
    sd = socket(AF_INET, SOCK_STREAM, IPPROTO_TCP);
    bind(sd, ...);
    listen(sd, 0);

    /* open a paste port */
    nmport_enable_option("offset");
    nmd = nmport_prepare(name);
    nmport_open_desc(nmd);

    /* attach a NIC */
    bzero(&hdr, sizeof(hdr));
    hdr.nr_version = NETMAP_API;
    hdr.nr_reqtype = NETMAP_REQ_PST_ATTACH;
    hdr.nr_body = (uintptr_t)&reg;
    bzero(&reg, sizeof(reg));
    reg.reg.nr_mem_id = nmd->reg.nr_mem_id;
    reg.reg.nr_mode = NR_REG_NIC_SW;
    ioctl(nmd->fd, NIOCCTRL, &hdr);

    fds.[0].fd = nmd->fd;
    fds.[0].events = POLLIN;
    fds.[1].fd = sd;
    fds.[1].events = POLLIN;
    for (;;) {
	/* monitor netmap and listen descriptor */
	poll(&fds, 2, 2000 /* use 0 for busy polling */);
	if (fds[1].revents & POLLIN) { /* accept and associate new fd */
	    struct nmreq_header hdr2;
	    struct nmreq_pst_fd_reg fdr;

	    newfd = accept(fds[1].fd, &client, &len);

	    hdr2 = hdr; // reuse the name
	    hdr2.nr_reqtype = NETMAP_REQ_PST_FD_REG;
            fdr.fd = newfd;
            hdr2.nr_body = (uintptr_t)&fdr;
            ioctl(nmd->fd, NIOCCTRL, &hdr);
	}
	if (fds[0].revents & POLLIN) {
	    struct netmap_if *nifp = nmd->nifp;
	    struct netmap_ring *rxr = NETMAP_RXRING(nmd->nifp, 0);
	    struct netmap_ring *txr = NETMAP_TXRING(nmd->nifp, 0);

	    while (!nm_ring_empty(ring)) {
		int i = ring->cur;
		struct netmap_slot *slot = ring->slot[i];
		char *buf = NETMAP_BUF_OFFSET(ring, slot->buf_idx);

		buf += nm_pst_getdoff(slot);
		... consume data on buf ...
		... we have also prepared something to transmit on buf ...
		write_txring(buf, len, nm_pst_getfd(slot), txr);
		ring->head = ring->cur = nm_ring_next(ring, i);
	    }
	}
    }
}
.Ed
.Pp
Note as with other
.Nm netmap ports ,
at this point checksum and segmentation offloading features
must be disabled in FreeBSD. However, in Linux, checksum offload must be enabled
via ethtool, although it does not actually effect unless the patch described in
netmap_paste.c is applied.
.\"
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr vale 4 ,
.Xr netmap 4
.Pp
Michio Honda, Giuseppe Lettieri, Lars Eggert,
Douglas Santry,
PASTE: A Network Programming Interface for Non-Volatile
Main Memory, USENIX NSDI 2018
.Pp
.\"
.Sh AUTHOR
.An -nosplit
.An Michio Honda .
.\"
